2025-08-26 10:23

Tags: #computers #performace #datamaskiner #executiontime

# Performance in computers
We mostly define performance as response time from a task on a computer $X$.
Hence, 
$\text{Performance}_X={1\over{\text{Execution time}_X}}$.
For computer $X$ and $Y$ we have that the performance of $X$ is better than $Y$ if,
$\text{Performance}_X\gt{\text{Performance}_Y}$

### Clock rate
The computer designers often want to increase the computers speed to do basic functionality, and from that we get clock rate. The clock is the central pulse of the entire computer. We often measure it in clock period, which is the time it takes to complete a full clock cycle. This is the time i takes the clock to be active until the clock is active again. It is also measured in the clock rate, which is the inverse of the clock cycle.
$$\text{Clock rate}={1\over{\text{Clock cycle}}}$$

### Instruction performance
The performance of a program depends on the amount of instructions generated by the [[compiler]]. For this reason the performance must also depend on the amount of instructions. Hence,
$$\text{CPU clock cycles}={\text{Instructions for a program}\times\text{Average clock cycle per instruction}}$$
The term clock cycle per instruction is often used, and is therefore shortened to CPI. We also have IPC which is the inverse, instructions per clock cycle. 

### The classic performance equation
With this we get the classic equation for computer performance.
$$\text{CPU time} = \text{Instruction count} + \text{CPI} + \text{Clock clycle time}$$
or,
$$\text{CPU time} = {{\text{Instruction count} + \text{CPI}} \over{\text{Clock rate}}}$$



### Final equation for performance

$$
\text{Time}={\text{Instructoins}\over{\text{Program}}}\times{\text{Clock cycles}\over{\text{Instructions}}}\times{\text{Seconds}\over{\text{Clock cycle}}}
$$
### The iron law

"...the only complete and reliable measure of computer prerformance is time."

## The power wall
For some time the performance of a computer could be increased by using more power. 





# Produksjon av integrerte kretser
Starter med silicon som deles opp til blank wafers. Så går mann igjennom mange steg som lager patterned wafers. Noe kommer ikke til å funke, så tar bort det. Etter det så pakker mann de sammen, så må det testes siden mann mister noen, så deaktiverer de og sender til bruker. 

### Hva er ytelse i datamaskin?
- Kjøretid
	- Tiden det tar fra du starter til det er ferdig 
	- Lavere tall er bedre
- Gjennomstrømning (throughput)
	- Mengden arbeid gjort per tidsenhet
	- Høyere tall er bedre
- Ytelse er invers kjøretid
	- Høyere er bedre

$Performance_x= 1/ExecutionTime$


### Clock

Datamaskiner er (ikke alltid) synkrone digitale systemer

Dette betyr at oppførselen til systemet kontrolleter av et klokkesignal

### The iron law

"...the only complete and reliable measure of computer prerformance is time."

$$
Kjøretid = klokkesykler per program * Sykeltiden 
$$
$$
Sykeltiden = 1 / klokkefrekvens
$$

$$
Intstruksjoner per prog * Klokkesykler * Sykeltid
$$
Vi setter ofte program som konstant og Sekunder / clock cycle konstant
Det gjør CPI proporsjonalt med kjøretid og IPC proporsjonalt med ytelse.

For å sammenligne tid så regner vi ut speedup tid
$SPEEDUP_TID = T_baseline/T_ny$

Energieffektivitet

Vi trenger benchmarks for å test ytelse på datamaskiner. Disse burder representere last som systemet skal gjøre. 

Amdahls lov er viktig. 
"Make the common case fast"


## Transistorer

Vi har to typer transistorer i dette kurset.

- PMOS
	- leder strøm når det er lav spenning
- NMOS 
	- leder strøm når den har høy spenning


