---
aliases:
  - process
---
2025-02-09 12:12

Tags: #it #os #linux #communication 

# Process 
A process is defined as an isolated running program. Where a program is stored statically on the disk, and running the program is loading it into memory and running the instructions on a [[Central Processing Unit|CPU]]. The process also has state associated with it, and this state is usually isolated from other processes to provide a level of security. One of the many tasks of the [[Operating System|operating system]] is to manage all the current processes, and share the physical resources of the computer between all the running processes. 
## Process id's (pid)
The pid is the unique identifier for each process on a [[Unix]]-like operating system. It is a incremental number generated by the operating system. This number is always unique and is used to interact with its corresponding process. For example it can be used to kill a process. ```
```bash
kill [pid]
```
### pid 1 and init
The first pid, pid 1, is special and always belongs to the init system. An init system is the first process that starts after boot, and it is manually started by the operating system. After the first process is started it can make all the other processes that run on the computer. 
## How to make a process
On [[Unix]]-like systems, making a process is done through the [[fork]] system call. This splits the currently running process into two of itself. To the process fork acts like a black box (like all system calls), and when it returns the process either is the child or the parent. The operating system gives the child a return code of 0, and the parent a return code of the pid of the child. 
### Inter-process communication

#### Message passing
Involves the kernel to pass messages across processes. 
#### Shared memory
You need synchronization, and that can be complex to implement.
## Further reading
- [[Thread]]
- [[Virtual machines]]
- [[Operating System]]
- [[Scheduling]]
